The titles and authors of the papers on active inference are:

1. 'Active inference and learning' by K Friston, T FitzGerald, F Rigoli and others. This paper offers an active inference account of choice behaviour and learning. It focuses on the distinction between goal-directed and habitual behaviour and how they contextualise each other.

2. 'Active inference: a process theory' by K Friston, T FitzGerald, F Rigoli, P Schwartenbeck and others. Active inference is a process theory derived from the variational free energy. It is a leading theory in neuroscience that provides a simple and neuro-biologically plausible account of how action and perception are coupled in producing (Bayes) optimal behaviour.

3. 'Active inference: demystified and compared' by N Sajid, PJ Ball, T Parr, KJ Friston. Active inference is a theory of perception, learning and decision making, which can be applied to neuroscience, robotics, and machine learning.

4. 'Active inference, curiosity and insight' by KJ Friston, CD Frith. This article offers a formal account of curiosity and insight in terms of active (Bayesian) inference.

5. 'Active inference and epistemic value' by K Friston, F Rigoli, D Ognibene, C Mathys et al. The resulting scheme resolves the exploration-exploitation dilemma: Epistemic value is maximized until there is no further information gain, after which exploitation is assured through maximization of extrinsic value.

6. 'Active inference, stressors and allostatic states' by KJ Friston, R Rosch, T Parr, C Price et al. This paper offers a formal account of emotional inference and stress-related behaviour, using the notion of active inference.

7. 'Active inference, curiosity and insight' by KJ Friston, CD Frith. This article offers a formal account of curiosity and insight in terms of active (Bayesian) inference.

8. 'On the relationship between active inference and control as inference' by B Millidge, A Tschantz, AK Seth, CL Buckley. Active Inference (AIF) is an emerging framework in the brain sciences which suggests that biological agents act to minimise a variational bound on model evidence.

9. 'Action understanding and active inference' by K Friston, J Mattout, J Kilner. This paper presents neuronal simulations based on the free-energy formulation of active inference, which is related to predictive coding.

10. 'The anatomy of choice: active inference and agency' by K Friston, P Schwartenbeck, T FitzGerald. This paper discusses the intricate linkage of exteroceptive perception to the rhythmic activity of the visceral body, and the rise of interoceptive inference theories of affective perception and self-consciousness in cognitive science.