The titles and authors of the papers on active inference are:

1. "Active inference and learning" by K Friston, T FitzGerald, F Rigoli and others.
2. "Active inference: a process theory" by K Friston, T FitzGerald, F Rigoli, P Schwartenbeck and others.
3. "Active inference: demystified and compared" by N Sajid, PJ Ball, T Parr, KJ Friston.
4. "Active inference, communication and hermeneutics" by KJ Friston, CD Frith.
5. "Reinforcement learning or active inference?" by KJ Friston, J Daunizeau, SJ Kiebel.
6. "Deep temporal models and active inference" by KJ Friston, R Rosch, T Parr, C Price et al.
7. "Active inference and epistemic value" by K Friston, F Rigoli, D Ognibene, C Mathys et al.
8. "On the relationship between active inference and control as inference" by B Millidge, A Tschantz, AK Seth, CL Buckley.
9. "Action understanding and active inference" by K Friston, J Mattout, J Kilner.
10. "The anatomy of choice: active inference and agency" by K Friston, P Schwartenbeck, T FitzGerald.

SOURCES: https://scholar.google.com/scholar?hl=en&as_sdt=0%2C5&q=active+inference&btnG=1. 

1. Active inference and learning 

This paper offers an active inference account of choice behaviour and learning. It focuses on the distinction between goal-directed and habitual behaviour and how they contextualise each other. Habits emerge naturally (and autodidactically) from sequential policy optimisation when agents are equipped with state-action policies. Active inference is a first principle account of how autonomous agents operate in dynamic, non-stationary environments. This problem is also considered in reinforcement learning (RL), but limited work exists on comparing the two approaches on the same discrete-state environments. The paper provides an accessible overview of the discrete-state formulation of active inference. Active inference provides a general framework for behavior and learning in autonomous agents. It states that an agent will attempt to minimize its variational free energy, defined in terms of beliefs over observations, internal states and policies. The active inference framework (AIF) is a promising new computational framework grounded in contemporary neuroscience that can produce human-like behavior through reward-based learning.

2. Active inference: a process theory

Active inference is a process theory derived from the variational free energy. The phrase 'active inference' generally refers to a process. It is a leading theory in neuroscience that provides a simple and neuro-biologically plausible account of how action and perception are coupled in producing (Bayes) optimal behaviour. It has been recently used to explain a variety of psychopathological conditions. Active Inference is a normative framework to characterize Bayes-optimal behavior and cognition in living organisms. All facets of behavior and cognition in living organisms follow a unique imperative: minimizing the surprise of their sensory observations.

3. Active inference: demystified and compared

Active inference is a theory of perception, learning and decision making, which can be applied to neuroscience, robotics, and machine learning. Recently, research has been taking place to scale up this framework using Monte-Carlo tree search and deep learning. The goal of this activity is to solve more complicated tasks using deep active inference. Active inference is a leading theory in neuroscience that provides a simple and neuro-biologically plausible account of how action and perception are coupled in producing (Bayes) optimal behavior; and has been recently used to explain a variety of psychopathological conditions.

4. Active inference, curiosity and insight: This article offers a formal account of curiosity and insight in terms of active (Bayesian) inference. It deals with the dual problem of inferring states of the world and learning its statistical structure. In contrast to current trends in machine learning (e.g., deep learning), the authors focus on how people attain insight and understanding using just a handful of observations. The paper discusses the concept of expected free energy (i.e., expected surprise or uncertainty) under prior beliefs that make indecisive or erroneous choices surprising. From the perspective of Active Inference, insight or explaining one's actions can be regarded as the product of inference. Attempting to explain one's behavior retrospectively requires comparison of different policies (sequences of actions) and their expected consequences. The paper was published on 11 September 2017 in the field of Computer Science, specifically Neural Computation.

5. Active inference and epistemic value

The resulting scheme resolves the exploration-exploitation dilemma: Epistemic value is maximized until there is no further information gain, after which exploitation is assured through maximization of extrinsic value. This is formally consistent with the Infomax principle, generalizing formulations of active vision based upon salience (Bayesian ... Abstract. We offer a formal treatment of choice behavior based on the premise that agents minimize the expected free energy of future outcomes. Crucially, the negative free energy or quality of a policy can be decomposed into extrinsic and epistemic (or intrinsic) value. Minimizing expected free energy is therefore equivalent to maximizing ... active agency and inference: free energy, foraging and epistemic v alue 5 Downloaded by [dimitri ognibene] at 02:17 08 April 2015 predictive distribution over hidden states. In this work, we employ probabilistic modeling and active inference to (1) develop a computational approach to infer the elusive construct of conceptual organization that is said to underlie aberrant speech production and TLD in schizophrenia and (2) test the hypothesis that the salience network in the brain tracks conceptual (dis)organization s... behind active inference, with a special focus on epistemic value and how this emerges under active (Bayesian) inference. The second section considers (biologically plausible) variational message passing schemes that can be used to simulate active inference in the context of partially observed Markov decision processes (Kaelbling et al., 1998)

6. Active inference, stressors and allostatic states

We identify the systems that underwrite goal-directed behavior, and the neuroendocrine and immunological systems, as the hierarchical controller that regulates energy resources. In doing so, we establish an etiological pathway from allostatic overload to depression via active inference. This paper offers a formal account of emotional inference and stress-related behaviour, using the notion of active inference. We formulate responses to stressful scenarios in terms of Bayesian belief-updating and subsequent policy selection; namely, planning as (active) inference. Using a minimal mo … Under active-inference allostatic load markers are embodied correlates of uncertainty. ... Under active inference, stress occurs when the system is surprised about its sensory data and therefore it is unsure about "what to do to safeguard its physical, ... Allostatic states are thus learned in response to chronic environmental stress. The regulation of homeostatic states - or of allostatic processes (Sterling and ... 2013) and especially the work of Seth and collaborators on interoceptive inference (i.e., Active Inference about interoceptive states) as a basis for emotion and conscious presence (Seth, 2013 ... Handbook of Life Stress, Cognition and Health. John Wiley ... Through the lens of active inference, we present an integrative model, combining therapeutic touch and communication, to achieve biobehavioural synchrony. This model speaks to how the brain develops a generative model required for recovery, developing successful therapeutic alliances, and regulating allostasis within paediatric manual therapy.

7. Active inference, curiosity and insight

This article offers a formal account of curiosity and insight in terms of active (Bayesian) inference. It deals with the dual problem of inferring states of the world and learning its statistical structure. In contrast to current trends in machine learning (e.g., deep learning), we focus on how people attain insight and understanding using just a handful of observations, which are ... Active Inference, Curiosity and Insight. Karl J. Friston, Marco Lin, +3 authors. S. Ondobaka. Published 11 September 2017. Computer Science. Neural Computation. This article offers a formal account of curiosity and insight in terms of active (Bayesian) inference. It deals with the dual problem of inferring states of the world and learning its ... Active Inference, Curiosity, and Insight 2651 of expected free energy (i.e., expected surprise or uncertainty) under prior beliefs that make indecisive or erroneous choices surprising. Open Access 21 October 2022 Active inference and the two-step task Sam Gijsen, Miro Grundei & Felix Blankenburg Scientific Reports 12, Article number: 17682 ( 2022 ) Cite this article 1718... From the perspective of Active Inference, insight or explaining one's actions can be regarded as the product of inference (Parr and Pezzulo, 2021). Attempting to explain one's behavior retrospectively requires comparison of different policies (sequences of actions) and their expected consequences. ... The curiosity reflected by foraging ...

8. On the relationship between active inference and control as inference

Active Inference (AIF) is an emerging framework in the brain sciences which suggests that biological agents act to minimise a variational bound on model evidence. Control-as-Inference (CAI) is a framework within reinforcement learning which casts decision making as a variational inference problem. While these frameworks both consider action selection through the lens of variational inference, the formal relationship between the two frameworks remains unclear. In this work, the authors attempt to shed light on this relationship. Active inference (AI) is a persuasive theoretical framework from computational neuroscience that seeks to describe action and perception as inference-based computation. However, this framework has yet to provide practical sensorimotor control algorithms that are competitive with alternative approaches. In this work, the authors frame active inference through the lens of control as inference (CaI).

9. Action understanding and active inference'

This paper presents neuronal simulations based on the free-energy formulation of active inference, which is related to predictive coding. The same representations can prescribe motor behavior and encode motor intentions during action-observation. The paper also introduces a model of oculomotor control during the smooth pursuit of occluded visual targets, based on active inference. Active inference is a theory of perception, learning and decision making, which can be applied to neuroscience, robotics, and machine learning. Recent research aims to scale up this framework using Monte-Carlo tree search and deep learning to solve more complicated tasks.

10. The anatomy of choice: active inference and agency

This paper discusses the intricate linkage of exteroceptive perception to the rhythmic activity of the visceral body, and the rise of interoceptive inference theories of affective perception and self-consciousness in cognitive science. It introduces a formal model of cardiac active inference, which explains how ascending cardiac signals entrain exteroceptive sensory perception and uncertainty. Through simulated psychophysics, the paper reproduces the defensive startle reflex and commonly reported effects linking the cardiac cycle to affective behaviour.
